Modern CPUs have many
cores, each of them
capable of executing an
independent instruction thread.
However, for your code to
take advantage of that,
it has to be designed
in order to do so.
For scientific
computing, you can
use OpenMP, which is a very
convenient way of exploiting
parallelism.
You annotate your
code with directives,
and the compiler will
automatically generate code
to spawn threads, and
to divide the workload
among those threads.
It is the de facto standard
for shared memory programming
in scientific computing.
It's a very extensive topic,
and here, we will barely
scratch the surface.
But PRACE offers quite a
number of courses dealing
with OpenMP in much more depth.
We consider an
application to compute pi.
The way this is done
is by throwing darts
at a square board.
In that square board,
a circle is inscribed,
and those darts that land
in the circle, those count.
So we do that by counting
the number of successes,
and then we have to loop from
1 to the total number of tries,
so the number of darts
which are going to thow.
We determine the x- and
the y-coordinate just by
way of a random
number, and we compute
whether those
particular coordinates
are inside the circle or not.
If that's the case, we increment
the number of successes by one.
And then, finally,
we can compute pi
by multiplying the
number of successes by 4
and dividing it by
the number of tries--
so quite straightforward.
The thing to note is that
the iterations of the
do loop are almost
independent, not quite,
because in each iteration, we
update number of successes.
And that is common
to each iteration,
but still, it's
almost independent.
And that's something
we can exploit in order
to do this in parallel,
because we could divide
the iterations into various
sequences of iterations, which
we can do in parallel
if we keep track
of the number of
successes in a proper way.
We can compile and run the code.
And doing so, 400
million iterations
gives us 5.5 seconds
approximately
as execution time.
So you can see, we get pi up
to five significant digits
in the sampled pi.
The execution of the program
unit will start in line 11,
and that just sets the initial
value for number of success.
Then we have our first
OpenMP directive,
and that's indicated by !$omp.
So that indicates it is an
OpenMP directive, something
the compiler has to
take into account.
And in this case,
it's a parallel.
So this opens a parallel region.
That means we had a
single thread executing.
When we open a
parallel region, we
get multiple threads all
doing the same thing,
unless we differentiate.
So what we need to
specify is which variables
are private to the threads--
that means the threads
have their own copy
of that variable--
and which are shared,
so which variables can be
accessed by all the threads
simultaneously.
The private variables
in this case
are x and y, the
coordinates and num_threads
and thread_num, which we'll
explain later, what they do.
So those are private.
The shared one is nr_success.
And we declare
default none, which
means that for
each variable that
occurs in our
parallel region, we
have to make a decision
whether it's private or shared.
In the next two lines, we
call some OpenMP functions,
omp_get_num_threads,
and omp_get_thread_num.
So the first one
gives the number
of threads which are active
in this parallel region.
And the second one,
omp_get_thread_num,
returns the thread
ID, the thread number
of each specific thread.
So num_threads will be
the same for all threads.
thread_num will be
individual for each thread,
starting from 0 to the
number of threads minus 1.
And we can use
thread_num in order
to control the flow
of our application.
So in this case, for the first
thread, with thread number 0,
we print the total number
of threads which are
active in this parallel region.
Next, we have our do loop,
and we have a work sharing
directive, !$omp do.
So this is going to
divide the iterations, one
to number of tries, over
the threads which are
active in this parallel region.
So, now each thread gets some
portion of the iterations
to compute, independent
of the others.
There is a reduction clause
here because, as we already
mentioned, nr_success
is a bit of a problem.
It's a shared variable.
It is updated by each and
every thread in each iteration.
But it's only used to
accumulate information,
so just accumulate counts.
And hence, we can
specify that that's
the case by declaring a
reduction clause with addition
operator for nr_success.
So special code is
generated in order
to ensure that
although nr_success
is updated from
multiple threads,
that will not
cause any problems.
It will not result
in a race condition.
When we are done with
the workshare do,
we end it with !$omp end do.
Then we're done with all the
work which happens in parallel.
So we close the parallel
region with !$omp end parallel.
So we started with
a single thread.
We got multiple threads by
opening the parallel region.
As soon as we close it, we
continue with a single thread.
And that single thread is
going to print the result
and going to print some
additional information.
And that's the end
of the programme.
To compile the
application using OpenMP,
we use the -fopenmp
compiler flag.
When we run the
application and time it,
you see that we get
the computation done
in less than a
second in this case.
And you can also see it's
running with 12 threads.
The result is very
similar to the one
of the serial application.
So basically, again, we get
five significant digits correct.
How well is our
application parallelized?
One way to measure this is
to compute the speed up.
So we run our application with
one thread, with two threads,
with four threads,
et cetera, and we
record the running times.
Then we can compute
the speed up.
This is the time it takes
to execute the application
with a single thread
divided by the time it
takes with n threads.
So ideally, the speed up is n.
But as you can
see from the plot,
that is not the case
for this application.
For 12 threads,
we get a speed up
of 7, which is, of
course, not optimal
since we would hope for 12.
So there is room for
improvement here.
A better way to characterise
how well an application is
parallelized is through
the parallel efficiency.
Basically, that is
the speed up divided
by the number of threads.
Of course, for one thread,
the parallel efficiency
is going to be 1.
And then it typically
slowly decreases.
And as you can see
here, for 12 threads,
we end up with a
parallel efficiency
which is just below 0.6 or 60%.
Looks easy, right?
But keep in mind that this
was a really simple example.
So for more sophisticated
code, OpenMP is not that easy.
It requires quite a lot of work
to get your code efficient.
And also, you have
to be quite careful
not to introduce bugs
like race conditions
into your application.